[AUDIO LOGO]
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Welcome
to "Beyond Belief."
Matt Richtel is with us, a
Pulitzer Prize-winning "New
York Times" reporter,
best-selling author.
Always great to have you
on the program, Matt.
>>MATT RICHTEL: George, it is
so nice to see you in person.
Oftentimes, we're--
>>NOORY: On the phone,
doing radio shows.
>>RICHTEL: In the
middle of the night.
>>NOORY: That's right.
There you go.
Anyways, tell us about your
new work on creativity.
>>RICHTEL: Well, it
is related in a way--
we're at a juncture because
things have exploded.
Lots of traditional
ways of doing things--
and you can name
almost any medium--
have been changed by technology.
It is an inflection point.
And it is, in particular,
an inflection point
for creativity.
So I stepped back
and spent a couple
of years looking at the
science of creativity,
the mystery of creativity, to
try to understand how it works.
And then in addition, why it's
so significant in this moment
in time.
>>NOORY: And it is
important, isn't it?
>>RICHTEL: I'll make
the case, George,
that creativity
is the most vital,
or one of the most vital,
of all human traits.
Think about it.
>>NOORY: And give us
your definition, Matt,
of creativity.
>>RICHTEL: OK, fair
enough, because I
was going to say it's applicable
to the creation of civilization
from Shakespeare to every
medical innovation we've got.
But your point's
actually well taken.
Creativity, in my definition,
need not be nearly that grand.
And in fact, creativity is
highly applicable to almost all
of us.
Here's how I define it.
I define creativity
as something new
that makes some contribution.
So let me tell you how
modest that could be.
Have you ever walked into the
kitchen, opened the fridge,
and discovered three
ingredients are left?
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RICHTEL: And you've somehow
made something of that.
Or do you just order out?
>>NOORY: You made your
peanut butter sandwich.
>>RICHTEL: You
made your peanut--
and somewhere along the
line, some mom or dad
walked into the kitchen and
there were three ingredients,
and he or she put that thing
together and created a dinner
for the kids.
That is a very modest
form of creativity.
But the reason I bring
it up is that creativity
can span from the modest all
the way to the extraordinary--
>>NOORY: True.
>>RICHTEL: --those things
that change our world.
And this is a particularly
creative moment in time.
May I just touch on the
science of why that is?
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RICHTEL: So this
book, "Inspired,"
starts in Jerusalem.
And I started in Jerusalem
because I thought to myself,
well, so much of our
understanding of creation
itself comes from the stories
here, whether you believe them
or not--
the mythologies, the tales.
So much of it's rooted there.
>>NOORY: It's amazing.
>>RICHTEL: It's amazing.
But I learned
something incredible
about Jerusalem that
was not the reason I
went there to begin with.
Jerusalem had a population in
the year zero of about 500,000.
Does that sound big
or small to you?
>>NOORY: In those days?
>>RICHTEL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Huge.
>>RICHTEL: Huge.
It's a huge number, George.
And the upshot of it
being a huge number
is there are lots of people
talking to each other,
communicating.
In a way, it's an industry town.
At that time, the
industry is religion
and there's a lot of ideas
and a lot of competition.
Now, let's fast--
>>NOORY: And no social media.
>>RICHTEL: True.
>>NOORY: No radio.
>>RICHTEL: Right.
>>NOORY: No television.
The only way to
communicate is one on one.
>>RICHTEL: One on one.
Or standing on a stump, like
the prophets may have done,
and speaking to a
bunch of people,
who, in turn, build on those
ideas, share those ideas.
You can think of a rock as
the original social media.
Not one you threw,
but one you stood on.
>>NOORY: That's why Jesus
might have been so popular--
the way he spoke to a crowd.
>>RICHTEL: That's it.
So in that respect, of course,
there was no social media.
But there was a
socializing of media
at that time in a
very busy place.
Here's what we've learned since.
The research and science will
bear out that over the years,
there have been these enclaves
of extraordinary creativity.
Paris, parts of Russia,
parts of Italy, Harlem, Los
Angeles with Hollywood--
you can go down the list.
But think of this moment in
time where anybody anywhere
can connect.
To your mind, how would
you rank that in terms
of its creative potential?
>>NOORY: Very high.
>>RICHTEL: Maybe the
highest it's ever been.
The-- I don't want
to start boring--
>>NOORY: I'm passing your
quiz no matter what, right?
>>RICHTEL: Yeah, you are.
I'm troubled because
I came to stump you.
>>NOORY: You're not yet.
But you might.
It's not over yet.
>>RICHTEL: Well, I don't
know any good trivia.
So it's a problem.
But this is interesting.
This is actually some really
not so interesting trivia,
but I'll throw it in.
The number of
international patents,
meaning patents applied for
by people across borders,
has exploded.
Now, how the heck are
those people communicating?
>>NOORY: Right.
>>RICHTEL: The internet, the
phone, email, various apps.
>>NOORY: Social.
>>RICHTEL: All social.
Incredibly explosively
creative period.
>>NOORY: I've never seen kids
pick up on technology so fast.
>>RICHTEL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: At a young age.
>>NOORY: One year
old, two years old,
they know how to
play a smartphone.
I couldn't have done
that in those days.
What are they going
to be like when they
get into the creative state?
>>RICHTEL: Well,
first of all, they're
going to be able to feast on
this extraordinary connection.
But you've really asked a
very significant question
and let me see if it's OK
if I answer it this way.
Can I talk a little bit about
young people and creativity,
and what the science
tells us about how
creative young people
are and why we sometimes
lose that creativity as adults?
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>RICHTEL: OK.
So, interestingly, researchers
in the '50s and '60s
started to really
ask about creativity.
And they started to
ask, are kids creative?
Do they lose creativity?
Why?
And they discovered something
called the fourth grade slump.
Are your grandkids
in fourth grade yet?
>>NOORY: One of them is, yes.
>>RICHTEL: And are
the others younger?
>>NOORY: They're older.
>>RICHTEL: They're older.
Well, I don't think-- given your
family history of creativity,
I'm not too worried.
But here's what happens
in fourth grade.
It's incredible to
think about this.
Kids prior to the
age of fourth grade
in this very seminal study
in the late '50s and '60s,
turn out to get less
creative after fourth grade.
The measure of creativity--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>RICHTEL: Yes, the measure
of creativity in this study
is how many random ideas
the kids come up with.
And they start
coming up with ideas
that are more cliched or more
accepted or have been come up
with before after fourth grade.
Now, what's your guess
as to why that might be?
>>NOORY: Oh, gosh,
society changes it.
>>RICHTEL: Tell me.
Keep going.
I haven't stopped you yet.
>>NOORY: School changes it.
>>RICHTEL: Boom.
I'm going to keep
trying to stump you.
>>NOORY: I'm doing well.
>>RICHTEL: We'll get there.
>>NOORY: Well, let me
show you something.
Emmy award-winning
composer Chris Spheeris
talks about young
people, creativity,
and how it diminishes, like
you're saying, in early years.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Up to the age of five,
we still have about 80%
of our creative potential
available to us.
And by the age of 12, when we
enter school at kindergarten,
it's diminished down to 2%.
Shocking.
By 12, by the time we
hit pubescence, which
should be wildly creative.
- So can anyone out there
imagine that most of us--
most of them-- I have to not
include myself there really--
are operating on 2% of
our creative potential?
And I believe our
creative potential
is our full potential of being.
That's everything that is.
- Everything.
- It's like taking
a beautiful plant
and cutting 98% of the
branches off and the leaves off
and expecting it to survive.
That's what we're doing.
- When we look at
society at large,
when we look at people around
us, as I said in the open,
we're seeing primarily
exhaustion, fear, defeatism.
We've been inundated
to the point where
we feel very small and less.
We don't have the energy.
How do you view--
- What a great word.
Energy.
- Yeah.
- Because I have a metaphor
that came to me about energy.
If you look at
what's popular now,
we're starting to
move our energy source
from finite fossil
fuel to almost infinite
solar or other sources.
So let's look at
that as a metaphor.
- Potentially plentiful.
- The reason we're
getting tired,
exhausted, frustrated, cut
out, alienated, all that stuff,
is because we are tapping into
our ego consciousness for fuel.
- Yes.
- And that seems to
be running our society
in a way that makes
us feel old and tired
and all those things
you mentioned.
Now, there is an
alternate energy source.
It's tapping into
our inspiration.
It's tapping into our real
fuel, which is our innocence.
It's our state of
awareness and presence.
It's all these things.
It's our creativity.
If we tap into that, as opposed
to our own self-concept--
and I mean, here's
the way I look at it.
Our culture, to me,
looks like this-- it
looks like we're all
at a Halloween party
and we're believing that
the person is the costume.
And we're forgetting
that there's
a person behind the costume.
And that's how I
see ego awareness is
in such a strong illusion.
And we're forgetting
that there is a pure soul
behind the masks we wear.
So how do we get back, right?
We do what we can to connect
to our innocence, which
happens through enthusiasm,
and passion, and compassion,
and love.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: What do you
think of that, Matt?
>>RICHTEL: First of all,
I'm jealous of his hair.
[LAUGHTER]
>>NOORY: Eh, it is what it is.
>>RICHTEL: It is what it is.
Look, the science will
bear out a lot of what
those two folks are saying.
If you go back to
fourth grade, there's
something interesting--
you alluded
to school-- there's something
interesting that happens.
Kids have grown up
hearing the following--
don't cross the street, don't
pick your nose and eat it,
don't eat food off the floor.
>>NOORY: Don't, don't, don't.
>>RICHTEL: And there's a
good reason for that, George.
There's actually-- I'm
not trying to judge this.
I'm trying to put it
through a scientific lens.
The good reason is we're
trying to teach kids
that there's many rules
they must follow in order
to survive.
I would point out that
what the kid also does
is begin to internalize the
idea that no comes before yes.
And creativity,
as I get into what
I consider to be the
wonders and mysteries of it,
is an act of saying yes.
It's an act of saying yes
to things that may be scary.
We've talked about
this on your show.
Do you want to go into the
creativity vomit research?
>>NOORY: Vomit research?
What the heck is that?
>>RICHTEL: OK, so this--
again, this book is a deep
dive into how creativity works
and the real science of it.
And the first thing that
I had to grapple with
is that creativity
oftentimes eludes us
because we are terrified of it.
One of the best studies--
are you ready for
the vomit study?
>>NOORY: Yep.
Fire away.
>>RICHTEL: Here we go.
A researcher says, we all say
we love creativity, but do we
actually really like creativity?
He said-- I call this
the smart dumb question.
We take something for granted.
And he goes out and he
does this study where he
uses a subconscious bias test.
This is the test that
we use to find out
if the thing we say about,
say, someone of another race,
or someone walking
across the street,
is if we actually feel
the way we say we feel.
>>NOORY: Or religion
or something.
>>RICHTEL: All of the above.
Do we harbor some biases
we have not expressed?
So we asked a bunch
of people, how
do you feel about creativity?
And they make these
associations, George.
What do you think
they say they think?
How do you think they say
they feel about creativity?
>>NOORY: I think they
think they're spot on.
>>RICHTEL: They
think it's wonderful.
They're like,
creativity is associated
with rainbows and puppy dogs
and chocolate ice cream.
All this great stuff.
But then they run a
subconscious bias test,
which involves
showing some images
and picking up how
people really feel.
Guess what, vomit, toxins,
poison, even death.
Now, what's going on?
Do you have a guess?
>>NOORY: Why they
have that flip-flop?
>>RICHTEL: Why do
they consciously say,
I love creativity, but
subconsciously say,
that scares the heck out of me.
>>NOORY: Because sometime
when they were smaller,
something happened to
them with creativity
and it distorted their views.
>>RICHTEL: That's a great
guess, and that's a piece of it.
There are two
other vital pieces.
Here's what creativity does.
One, it takes an
immense risk, which
is what you're alluding to.
If you come up with an idea
someone hasn't come up with
before, only in retrospect
do we say, great idea,
Elon Musk changed the world.
But how many Elon Musks were
there that failed miserably,
that had terrible financial
trouble, whose marriage has
dissolved, that were drinking?
>>NOORY: Many, many.
>>RICHTEL: Many.
Many more than succeeded.
So the science of
creativity will
show it is an immense risk
for those who actually try it,
and, therefore, scary.
And there's a second reason
creativity, the science shows,
is so scary.
And that's because, what happens
when creativity succeeds?
What's your take on
why would that be scary
if creativity succeeds?
>>NOORY: Because people might
not know how to handle it.
>>RICHTEL: People don't
know how to handle it.
And worst of all are the people
don't know how to handle it
who were invested
in the prior thing.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
>>RICHTEL: And that
is so much of society.
So get this-- well,
let's just take Elon Musk
because we've been
talking about him.
All this wonderful
electric vehicles--
again, no political or
partisan judgment here-- but
if you're in the
oil industry, if you
run General Motors, if
you're a coal miner,
that could be a serious problem.
One person's innovation
is another person's death.
And that's why--
>>NOORY: Absolutely true.
>>RICHTEL: --creativity
is terrifying.
For us to be creative, we've
got to understand the terror.
>>NOORY: We have lots of truck
drivers who listen to my radio
show--
>>RICHTEL: Yes.
>>NOORY: --coast to coast.
>>NOORY: I am opposed
to driverless trucks.
>>RICHTEL: There you go.
>>NOORY: They are
working on them.
They are testing them.
It's going to happen.
I don't want our truck
drivers out of jobs.
>>RICHTEL: This is the very--
we had this conversation,
and you mentioned it before.
And it's the perfect example of
where one person's innovation
is another person's job loss.
>>NOORY: But I want to talk
about Jeff Bezos for a moment.
In your opinion, when he
came up with this concept,
I'm going to sell
books on the internet,
people don't have to go
to bookstores anymore,
and I'm doing it
out of my garage--
>>RICHTEL: Yes.
>>NOORY: --do you
think he envisioned
having the world's largest
online retail establishment?
>>RICHTEL: This is what I--
it's a great
question and I can't
say because it's one of
the handful of really
luminaries in this space I
haven't talked to personally.
But I actually do have an answer
based on the science, which
is many of these great
creators don't really
start with the big
vision and the end game
they start out with.
They start out with
moments of insight.
>>NOORY: Do they luck into it?
>>RICHTEL: They work
their way into it
by a series of creations
that follow one on the next.
Well, what I'm
getting at is, George,
I think a lot of
creative people both
have a point on the
horizon and the thing
that's in front of them.
But when they're really
driven and creative,
each step of the way becomes
its own creative pursuit.
>>NOORY: Tell me if
this is creative.
I'm at an event one day.
>>RICHTEL: Yes.
>>NOORY: And a lady
comes up to me and says,
you got to help me.
I said, well, what's wrong?
What can I do for you?
She said, I went on a
date last week with a guy
and I started talking
about UFOs and Bigfoot.
And we were having dinner.
And he said, what?
And I said, UFOs, Bigfoot.
And he went, you're nuts.
He got up and left.
You got to do
something for people
like us who understand this.
And I came back
and said, you know
what, I've got this
vehicle of this radio show.
I'm going to come
up with something
called paranormaldate.com.
And it is immensely successful.
But I matched people together--
>>RICHTEL: Yes, it's
highly creative.
It's highly creative.
I just want to go back
to part of this story.
She tells-- because
I'm going to come
to some interesting science in
a second about this every store.
You go home.
Are you in a car ride home?
Are you sitting in bed?
>>NOORY: I'm thinking of
this lady on the way home.
I'm thinking of this lady
when I'm at the office.
And all of this
came to me because
of what happened to her.
>>RICHTEL: Are
you writing notes?
Are you obsessed--
>>NOORY: I'm taking notes.
>>RICHTEL: --with this idea?
>>NOORY: I call a
friend of mine who's
an expert on the internet.
And I said, let me
throw this by you.
And he said, I love this idea.
Let me run with it.
And I said, all right,
I'll make you a partner.
Do it all.
I'm not going to do it.
I don't have time for this.
But this is my concept.
>>RICHTEL: So, look,
what you've hit on,
in many respects, George, is
the very idea behind this book.
What is the aha moment?
It is the essence of creativity.
Just quickly tell
me, what did it
feel like when you were in
the throes of that idea, when
you had to get it out?
>>NOORY: It was an aha moment.
>>RICHTEL: Were you euphoric?
Were you excited?
>>NOORY: It was a light
bulb over my head.
I don't get excited about
a lot of things, Matt.
But this was a light bulb moment
where I said, this will work.
Now, I want to show you
this Chris Spheeris again,
the composer, talking
about all of this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Inspiration is given to
us as the operative language
of creation.
It is the core energy, the
prime directive of existence--
inspiration and creativity.
See, this is--
I've been thinking about
this prior to this interview.
And last night, I
was thinking about,
most cultures have
called God the creator.
- Yes.
- Look how much importance
we put on creativity--
- Yes.
- --in a spiritual sense.
So where does love fit in?
Well, if inspiration
is a state of openness,
a state of presence, which
is very important to this
conversation-- the state of
complete awareness of being
and being completely absorbed
and engrossed in our experience
where there's no distraction,
meaning even our thoughts
aren't distracting us--
then I think our natural state
is that of being in love.
In the state of love.
- That presence.
- Presence.
So I equate presence with
love, with, inspiration.
It's all the same.
- Yes.
- So when I have
thoughts running,
or when I'm watching something
and I'm speaking to you
and I'm looking
over your shoulder
because there's a television
screen or something else,
or I'm thinking about my
day, I'm not loving you.
And with myself, if
I'm running my program
with all kinds of things
going on like this,
and I'm reaching for the
phone and going to email,
I'm doing this, I'm doing that.
I'm not allowing
myself to be loved.
Because when I can fully be
aware of what's coming to me,
fully be aware of my experience
no matter what it is,
I am being loved
by the universe,
by being given pure awareness.
When I look at quantum is
when you make a quantum leap,
there is no precedent
for that quantum leap.
It defies the laws
of probability.
Now, as an artist
and a creator, I only
can speak from my own
experience that whatever
I create, whether it's a
song, or whether it's a poem,
or whether it's even sometimes a
photograph or some digital art,
or a film, a short
film that I make,
I really don't know
where that came from.
- It's always beyond
those limitations.
- It's never predictable.
It's like I could lead
up to it by practicing
scales and learning
chords and all that.
But when I truly open up
to real pure inspiration
and let myself just go
and become a vehicle,
and that's a really important
concept that I don't want to--
I want to elaborate on that.
And to become a
vehicle of creation
and just let it go and trust--
another important concept.
What comes out
surprises me constantly.
So I feel-- and
oftentimes, I'll create
something that's completely
unprecedented in my field.
And I'm like, where
did that come from?
And I call that a quantum leap.
I call it creativity
comes out of the quantum
yield of endless
possibility, and that
is the field in miracles also.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Well, said.
But tell me about your
Charles Schulz story.
>>RICHTEL: Charles Schulz.
So years ago, I had a
syndicated comic strip.
My editor was the editor of
Charles Schulz "Peanuts."
And I said, tell me about him.
And this is the
story she told me.
She said that every
morning he'd wake up
and he'd be overcome
and think, I
have an idea for a comic strip.
This is the perfect
idea for a comic.
>>NOORY: This is
before "Peanuts."
>>GEORGE NOORY:
This is "Peanuts."
Every morning, his strip,
"Peanuts," he'd think,
today's the day.
I've got a perfect
idea for today's strip.
>>NOORY: Aha.
OK.
>>RICHTEL: He'd have an
aha moment like that.
>>NOORY: And come
up with his stuff.
>>RICHTEL: And he'd
start writing all day.
He'd wake up in the
morning the next day,
and he would look at his
strip and he'd think,
I don't think that's it.
Wait a minute, I have the idea
today for the perfect strip.
Now, the reason I bring up that
story, and I do so in relation
to the idea that you
had when you heard
the woman and your paranormal
dating site, was you
could argue that that
woman gave you the idea.
But I would say what
the science suggests
is that you heard some raw
material information that
intersected with a whole bunch
of much more mysterious dots
roaming around
your subconscious.
And you put those
things together
and had one of those
lightning bolt moments.
Is that a fair way
to describe it?
>>NOORY: Yeah, that's fair.
Now, would I have
come up with this idea
had she not told me her
horrible date night story?
>>RICHTEL: Yes.
>>NOORY: I'm not sure.
>>RICHTEL: You may not have.
>>RICHTEL: That doesn't make
this story irrelevant or even
unrelated to what
we're talking about,
because here's what we
know about creators--
creators are people-- relative
to apropos of what Chris was
saying there--
who take in a lot
of information.
So people who tend to
be creative, we know,
tend to actually see
more-- physically
see more with their eyes,
record more information,
and take in information
as very curious people.
You must be one of the
most curious people
I've come across.
Is that a fair--
>>NOORY: That's probably fair.
>>RICHTEL: You've spent your
life listening to people
and taking in information.
>>NOORY: And investigating.
>>RICHTEL: And in-- full
stop, investigating ideas.
The reason, in part,
you may have come up
with that idea is because you
have gathered a storm of dots
inside your subconscious, that
in turn collected in some way
and came out with
that date site--
date idea.
But I want to hit on one
other part of your brain
that got involved.
What we understand
about creativity now
and the neuroscience
of creativity
is that there are two parts
of the brain involved.
One is the one that
happened for you
when that woman came to you.
And in the car, and at
home, and at the office,
bubbling in the round
in the back of your head
was this explosion.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>RICHTEL: But then
it began to get run
over the rugged logical
parts of George's brain.
>>NOORY: How am
I going to do it?
>>RICHTEL: Tell me about
what you think you--
what do you think you
processed after the idea?
What ideas-- what kinds
of logic do you think
you ran that idea through?
>>NOORY: The most
logical was I need
to find somebody who understands
how to do this technically.
I can't.
I don't know it.
As creative as I think I am in
coming up with this concept,
I need some help.
And then that's what I did.
The other part of my brain
went out and fought and found
that kind of person.
>>RICHTEL: So that's
a perfect example
of how you took an inspiration
and created an execution.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>RICHTEL: And the execution is
a different part of the brain.
It's a much more rugged,
intellectual part of the brain.
>>NOORY: Much like you say,
Matt, Gaia's "Inspirations,"
Michael Gelb talks
about creativity.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Now we need to generate
lots of new ideas.
It's what people usually
call brainstorming.
- Or mind-mapping.
- Right.
So then you can use mind-mapping
to generate those ideas.
There's lots of
other techniques,
but that's the most
effective one I found.
So you generate lots of ideas.
And then I have a couple of
really cool cheap practices
for generating new ideas.
- Can we do one of them?
Can you do--
- Well, one of the simplest
ones was contributed
by my dear friend,
Wendy Palmer, who
was sixth dan aikido
sensei, a musician,
leadership consultant and--
- Creative.
- --an amazingly powerful and
inspirational human being.
And her generation
phase exercise--
I asked her, what would you
like to contribute to the book?
And she said, have
people do whatever
mindfulness meditation-centering
practice they do.
And then open themselves to
the creative wisdom of whoever
inspires them the most.
So it might be
Leonardo da Vinci.
It might be Marie Curie.
It could be Queen Elizabeth I.
- The collective
consciousness of that.
- But choose a
particular representation
that works for you and ask that
it be present with you as you--
- Pull it down.
- --pull it down and
approach this problem.
And it's so simple,
it's so elegant.
- It's a great idea.
- Right.
So--
- That's how you
generate new ideas.
- You generate new--
that's just one of them.
There's also another great
one from Stephen Russell,
barefoot doctor.
And he created this
amazing practice.
It takes a little too long
to talk about in detail
now, but you're moving the
energy between the front
and the back to open up--
basically, opening up the
crown chakra to let the wisdom
come powering in.
- Those two work well together.
- Yeah.
So those are the two I put
in for the generation phase
because they work well
together as you immediately,
intuitively recognized.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: Creativity
doesn't come to everybody.
Why not, Matt?
>>RICHTEL: I think the why not
is because we block it out.
And I'm going to
offer the simplest
way of thinking about how to
let it in that I've come across.
I'll share one of my
own to give people
a sense of what creativity feels
like if they feel like they
don't have it in them.
Because this book
makes the case,
again, based not
on woo-woo stuff,
but on hard-core science.
>>NOORY: Right.
Very practical.
>>RICHTEL: Very deeply
practical that every one of us
has creativity inside.
So when I was a kid, we
had not a ton of money.
And I would go to bed at night
and I would dream that someone
had given me a five--
not dream-- fantasize
that someone had given me
a $500 gift certificate to the
sporting goods store, George.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>RICHTEL: And I had a
basket in front of me
and I had to fill it with stuff.
And I would go to bed at night
and I would fill it with things
and fall asleep.
>>NOORY: A baseball
glove, whatever.
>>RICHTEL: I would submit
to you that before people
go to bed, or at other times
when they're very relaxed,
their mind wanders.
I think it's one of the most
common things people do.
Here's what they don't realize.
When I was telling myself
that story, I was a writer.
Any time, George, your mind
wanders, you are a writer.
You are an entrepreneur.
You might tell yourself
the lyrics for a song.
But people don't credit
themselves enough,
and often just dismiss
those as mind-wandering.
Does that make sense?
>>NOORY: Yes, it does.
But I think what you're
saying, your dream state
is one of the most creative
areas that we have.
>>RICHTEL: The
mind-wandering state,
the edge of consciousness,
it used to be that--
and I'm going to--
I think it's Edison,
and, if I'm not mistaken,
Salvador Dali, used to do this--
it's in the book, if
I've mistaken the artist.
But I think these are they--
they would take a nap
every day, or occasionally,
with a rock in their
hand or a heavy object.
And as they would
nod off to sleep,
the object would
fall from their hands
and they would awaken from
the sound and have ideas.
And they would call--
>>NOORY: Interesting technique.
>>RICHTEL: It's an
interesting technique.
The researchers call it
a hypnagogic test state.
>>NOORY: State.
>>RICHTEL: Thank you.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
It works.
What is the spice rack
theory of creativity?
>>RICHTEL: So this goes
back to that very notion
we were talking about earlier
with your paranormal dating
site.
Inside George Noory's brain is
a whole bunch of information.
I think of the information
that each of us
contains and gather over
the years as a spice
rack of potential
contributors to creativity.
You go into your kitchen.
You open the spice rack.
The number of things you
can create for dinner
depends entirely on
the number of spices
that you have available to you.
Similarly, your
ability to be creative,
depends on your ability--
not you, George,
but one's ability--
>>NOORY: I understand.
>>RICHTEL: --depends
on one's ability
to bring in a lot of material.
Why do I mention this?
We live in a period
of time, George,
where it is very tempting
to shut out information
because it feels too
chaotic, to choose
a position that is rigid--
>>NOORY: And safe.
>>RICHTEL: --and safe.
There are lots of
reasons to do that.
But to be creative, as your
other guests have alluded
to in these wonderful
videos, depends, in part,
on opening yourself up to
all the spices around you,
the emotions and ideas, that
scary though they might be,
are the foodstuff of the
next great dating site.
>>NOORY: That's true.
Absolutely.
Are there similar traits
of very creative people?
>>RICHTEL: Curiosity,
a willingness
to listen to yourself
and the ideas,
and a willingness
not to be so rigid,
and then a faith that the
idea that you come up with
deserves at least to
be shared in the world,
even though it might fail.
And I'll tell you a
great Einstein story.
Einstein comes to a
colleague and says--
you remember he wanted to find
the unified field theory that
would explain everything?
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>RICHTEL: It was his dream.
He comes to a colleague
and he says, I've got it.
I've got the unified
field theory finally.
And he tells it
to his colleague.
And his colleague
says, well, Albert,
that's great, except
under that theory,
the universe can't exist.
[LAUGHS]
>>NOORY: Sorry, Albert.
>>RICHTEL: Sorry, Albert.
You missed this time.
You know what Albert Einstein
is known for among scholars
who study him?
He's known for his
number of failures.
>>NOORY: Wow.
If the poor guy had
a computer, do you
know how good he
would have been?
[LAUGHTER]
>>RICHTEL: He would
have been good, George.
>>NOORY: Gaia's got a show
called "Inspirations."
Chris Attwood was discussing the
power of the creative process.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- That's really one of the
powers that ritual has,
is that it allows us to
be able to get in a space
where we can create what we
choose to have in our life.
- How can you use it to
really improve your life?
What situation would it work
with to improve your life?
- Yeah, so the ritual
has many purposes
from many different
perspectives.
And of course, improve
is a relative term.
But what you'll see
is, in every industry,
people who are really,
really successful
have all incorporated
rituals into their life
in one way or another.
And so you see
that sports players
use rituals to improve
their performance,
to be able to get their mind
into the game as it were.
The musicians and
artists use rituals
to spark their
creativity so that they
can be the best at
what their passion is.
Business leaders use rituals
to create cohesive teams
and to create strong
corporate cultures.
Celebrities use
rituals to create
balance between their personal
lives and their work lives.
And for me, all of those
are improving your life.
Rituals help you manage
your time, your energy
and your thinking.
And all of us need that, right?
- Yes.
- And so the rituals are a
way of bringing ourselves back
to ourselves.
And it could be by
establishing a routine
in our life, a daily
set of rituals,
so that we have time for
exercise, for stretching,
for breathing, for
meditation, or prayer.
- Oh, so those are rituals.
- Those are all rituals.
- Oh, OK.
- And then as we
come into our day,
having had that sequence of
actively engaging our body
and then quieting our
mind and our body as well,
when we come into our
activity, then we're more calm.
When things go more smoothly,
that we don't feel as upset.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>NOORY: I'll tell you
what's creative, Matt.
>>RICHTEL: Tell me.
>>NOORY: G-A-I-A.com.
Coming up with the concept
to do all these programs,
that's creative, too.
>>RICHTEL: For sure.
For sure.
It's an interesting time when
you see an explosion of people
who feel enabled with
all the technology
to come up with all these ideas.
But can I key on something your
guest said right there, which
I think was really important?
At the very beginning,
he alluded to the fact
that creativity can be
associated with happiness.
In one of the pieces of
research I found so compelling
in this book--
and, again, I came at
this journalistically,
not from a position where I
had an ax to grind or something
to prove.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>RICHTEL: So I was surprised
to see that people who create,
find themselves happier.
And the reason--
>>NOORY: And wealthier.
>>RICHTEL: Well, yes, or poorer.
[LAUGHS] Both.
Do you want to take a stab
at-- since I can't stump you--
why creativity is
associated with happiness?
>>NOORY: I think it's
an innate personality
trait of the creative person.
>>RICHTEL: And you think
once expressed, it allows--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>RICHTEL: Yeah, so--
>>NOORY: They're doing
what they like to do.
>>RICHTEL: That is
absolutely the case.
There's one other
piece of research
that really struck me for those
who tend not to be creative
but want to experience it.
There's research that
suggests when people create,
meaning they express ideas
that they haven't expressed
before that are
honest and authentic,
that they feel unburdened.
That some weight has
come off their shoulders.
And what's interesting
about this research
is it suggests when
people do a creative act--
pick up a paintbrush, start
a business, write a song--
they might feel unburdened
from weights unassociated even
with the creativity
they're expressing.
So there is something
very natural
and vital about that
act of expression.
>>NOORY: And healthy.
>>RICHTEL: Extremely healthy.
>>NOORY: How do people
track your work?
>>RICHTEL: Well,
first of all, George,
they can listen to us
together on the radio or here.
And I'm grateful.
MattRichtel.com.
M-A-T-T-R-I-C-H-T-E-L.com.
My email is there
and I am always
happy to hear from people.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
Thanks for being on
"Beyond Belief," Matt.
>>RICHTEL: Thanks, George.
Grateful.
>>NOORY: Creativity,
it's a gift, it's an art,
and if you can use
it properly, you
can open up all kinds of doors.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]